**************
Advanced Usage
**************

The following topics may be relevant when working on real-world documentation 
projects, which often demand a greater level of customization.

A TOC for every class
=====================
It is also possible to use :rst:dir:`autoclasstoc` in auto-generated API 
documentation, i.e. where all of the classes in your project are documented 
without you having to explicitly write an :rst:dir:`autoclass` directive for 
each one.  The way to do this is to use the :ext:`autosummary` extension with a 
custom Jinja template for classes, as detailed below:

1. Configure the :ext:`autosummary` extension to automatically generate stub 
   files each time the documentation is built:

   .. code-block:: python
      :caption: conf.py

      autosummary_generate = True

   Alternatively, you could generate stub files yourself by running the 
   ``autogen`` command when necessary (after completing steps 2 and 3 below).  
   I find this less convenient, but it might be better if you intend to edit 
   the stub files by hand:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ sphinx-autogen -t _templates path/to/doc/with/autosummary.rst

2. Add an :rst:dir:`autosummary` directive with the ``:toctree:`` and 
   ``:recursive:`` options to your documentation.  Anywhere will work, but 
   ``index.rst`` is a common choice:

   .. code-block:: rst
      :caption: index.rst

      .. autosummary::
         :toctree: path/to/directory/for/autogenerated/files
         :recursive:

         module.to.document

3. Provide a custom Jinja_ template for formatting class stub files.  The 
   purpose of this template is to specify that :rst:dir:`autoclasstoc` should 
   be used for each class:

   .. code-block:: rst
      :caption: _templates/autosummary/class.rst

      {{ fullname | escape | underline}}
      
      .. currentmodule:: {{ module }}
      
      .. autoclass:: {{ objname }}
         :members:
         :undoc-members:
         :special-members:
         :private-members:
         :inherited-members:
         :show-inheritance:
      
         .. autoclasstoc::

   Note that the name of the ``_templates`` directory depends on the value of 
   the ``templates_path`` setting in ``conf.py``.

.. _Jinja: https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/

Custom sections
===============
By default, :rst:dir:`autoclasstoc` divides the TOC into sections based whether 
or not attributes are methods, and whether or not they are public.  This is a 
reasonable default, but for many projects it may make sense to add custom 
sections specific to the idioms of that project.  Fortunately, this is easy to 
configure.  The basic steps are:

1. Define new :class:`autoclasstoc.Section` subclasses.
2. Reference the subclasses either in ``conf.py`` or in the documentation 
   itself.
  
This approach is very powerful, because the `Section` class controls all 
aspects of defining and formatting the TOC sections, and its subclasses can 
overwrite any of that behavior.  Below are some specific examples showing how 
custom sections can be configured:

Based on name
-------------
Categorizing attributes based on their names is convenient, because it doesn't 
require making any changes or annotations to the code itself.  For this 
example, we'll make a custom "Event Handlers" section that will consist of 
methods that begin with the prefix "on\_", e.g. :meth:`on_mouse_down()` or 
:meth:`on_key_up()`.

The first step is to define a new `Section` subclass with the following 
attributes:

- :attr:`~autoclasstoc.Section.key`: used to include or exclude the section 
  from class TOCs.
 
- :attr:`~autoclasstoc.Section.title`: how the section will be labeled in the 
  documentation.

- :meth:`~autoclasstoc.Section.predicate`: which attributes to include in the 
  section.

.. code-block::
  :caption: conf.py

  from autoclasstoc import Section, is_method

  class EventHandlers(Section):
      key = 'event-handlers'
      title = "Event Handlers:"

      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return is_method(name, attr) and name.startswith('on_')

We also have to redefine the "Public Methods" section, so that it *doesn't* 
include the event handlers (as it otherwise would):

.. code-block::
  :caption: conf.py

  from autoclasstoc import PublicMethods

  class RemainingPublicMethods(PublicMethods):
      
      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return super().predicate(name, attr, meta) and not name.startswith('on_')
  
Finally, we need to specify that our new sections should be used by default 
(and what order they should go in):

.. code-block::
  :caption: conf.py

  autoclasstoc_sections = [
          'event-handlers',
          'public-methods',
          'private-methods',
  ]

Based on decorator
------------------
A more explicit way to categorize methods is to use a decorator to label 
methods that belong to a particular section.  This approach only is only 
applicable to methods and inner classes (because data attributes cannot be 
decorated), but is easy to implement.  For this example, we'll make a section 
for "Read Only" methods that are identified by a decorator:

The first step is to write a decorator to label read-only methods:

.. code-block:: python

  def read_only(f):
      f.__readonly__ = True
      return f

  class MyClass:

      @read_only
      def do_nothing(self):
          pass

Next, we have to define `Section` subclasses that are aware of the decorator:

.. code-block:: python
  :caption: conf.py

  from autoclasstoc import Section

  class ReadOnlySection(Section):
      key = 'read-only'
      title = "Read-Only Methods:"

      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return getattr(attr, '__readonly__', False)

  class ReadWriteSection(Section):
      key = 'read-write'
      title = "Read/Write Methods:"
      
      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return not getattr(attr, '__readonly__', False)

  autoclasstoc_sections = [
          'read-only',
          'read-write',
  ]

Note that this example removes the distinction between private and public 
methods, so both the "Read-Only" and "Read/Write" sections will contain public 
and private methods.

Based on ``:meta:`` fields
--------------------------
With :ext:`autodoc`, it's possible to describe how an object should be 
documented by including `:meta: <info-field-lists>` fields in that object's 
docstring.  :rst:dir:`autoclasstoc` automatically parses these fields and 
provides them as an argument to :meth:`~autoclasstoc.Section.predicate()`, so 
they can be easily used to categorize attributes.  As in the previous example, 
we'll make a custom section for read-only methods.  The snippet below shows how 
such a method might be identified using a meta field:

.. code-block:: python

  class MyClass:

      def do_nothing(self):
          """
          This method doesn't do anything.

          :meta read-only:
          """
          pass

These meta fields are parsed into a dictionary such that ``:meta key: value`` 
would give ``{'key': 'value'}``.  This dictionary is provided to the 
:meth:`~autoclasstoc.Section.predicate()` method via the *meta* argument:

.. code-block:: python
  :caption: conf.py

  from autoclasstoc import Section

  class ReadOnlySection(Section):
      key = 'read-only'
      title = "Read-Only Methods:"

      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return 'read-only' in meta

  class ReadWriteSection(Section):
      key = 'read-write'
      title = "Read/Write Methods:"
      
      def predicate(self, name, attr, meta):
          return 'read-only' not in meta

  autoclasstoc_sections = [
          'read-only',
          'read-write',
  ]

Custom CSS
==========
All of the HTML elements generated by :rst:dir:`autoclasstoc` are contained in 
a ``<div>`` with class ``autoclasstoc``.  This can be used to select and style 
the elements in the class TOC.  Note that the plugin includes some default 
rules to control the spacing around the ``<details>`` elements that contain 
TOCs for inherited attributes.

